platform/concepts New article on firewall configuration added (#1830)
aiven/devportal: docs/platform/concepts/aiven-node-firewall-configuration.rst

Aiven service nodes firewall configuration
##########################################

Overview
--------
Aiven nodes are built using Linux. Firewall configuration is managed using native Linux kernel-level iptables rules that limit connectivity to nodes.
The iptables configuration is generated dynamically at runtime depending on service type, deployment parameters and user preferences. Rules are updated when required, for example when deploying multi-node clusters of services.
For intra-node connections, connections are limited to point-to-point connections to specific IP address. All traffic to ports that are not required for the service to function is rejected instead of dropped to avoid timeouts.
Service ports that customers can connect to depend on what service and deployment type is in question and what configuration the customer has defined, including:

* Is the service in a public network, dedicated VPC, virtual cloud account, or a `BYOA <https://docs.aiven.io/docs/platform/concepts/byoa>`_ setup ?
* Has the customer configured IP ranges in  user_config.ip_filter?

> * Has the customer enabled public internet access for otherwise private-only services?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Have you :doc:`enabled public internet access for services in a VPC </docs/platform/howto/public-access-in-vpc>`?
```

Reviewer: Please check this is accurate and the link is appropriate.

Commonly opened ports
----------------------
Aiven services commonly assign the following ports for services when deployed without any special configuration:

=============================   =============================================================
Port                            Description
=============================   =============================================================

> 22                              Aiven management plane traffic over ssh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
22                              Aiven management plane traffic over SSH
```

80 (proxy, not open on nodes)   Redirect http web traffic to https
443                             Web user interface traffic

                                *  Kafka® Connect
                                *  Flink®
                                *  Grafana®
                                *  OpenSearch® Dashboards

> 30287                           Aiven Platform management port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
30287                           Aiven platform management port
```

500, 4500 (UDP)                 IPSec (IKE, IPSEC NAT-T)
=============================   =============================================================

Service ports
--------------

> Aiven service ports are assigned randomly as offsets of a base port number. The base port number is set per-project, so that for example a PostgreSQL® service and a MySQL®

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aiven service ports are assigned randomly as offsets of a base port number. The base port number is set per project. That means that a PostgreSQL® service and a MySQL®
```

service in the same project will have closely resembling or even overlapping port numbers. These ports are in the 10000 to 30000 range.

> If a base port number is not defined, the service will be assigned a random port number. This is defined during runtime when the service is started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a base port number is not defined, the service is assigned a random port number. This is defined during runtime when the service is started.
```

Cloud management
----------------

> Local access to metadata address is allowed to 169.254.169.254/32. This includes ports 123 and 52 for services like NTP and local DNS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Local access to the metadata address is allowed via 169.254.169.254/32. This includes ports 123 and 52 for services like NTP and local DNS.
```

Reviewer: Minor grammatical suggestion, but please reword if this isn't quite right. :)

> Azure health checks, DHCP and DNS are allowed from IP 168.63.129.16/32 using ports 67 and 53. This is an Azure-specific management address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Azure health checks, DHCP, and DNS are allowed from IP 168.63.129.16/32 using ports 67 and 53. This is an Azure-specific management address.
```

Enhanced compliance environments
--------------------------------

> In `Enhanced Compliance Environments (ECE) <https://docs.aiven.io/docs/platform/concepts/enhanced-compliance-env>`_, there is additional filtering at VPC level and a socks5 proxy. ECE environments have more variable configurations due to the fact that customers have more flexibility on setting configuration requirements. Typically ECE nodes are accessible only over VPC connections and are not exposed to the internet. This results in layered firewalls with cloud-provider SDN firewalls being in use in addition to individual node-specific iptables rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `Enhanced Compliance Environments (ECE) <https://docs.aiven.io/docs/platform/concepts/enhanced-compliance-env>`_, there is additional filtering at VPC level and a SOCKS5 proxy. ECE environments have more variable configurations because we provide more flexibility for configuring these to meet your requirements. Typically, ECE nodes are accessible only over VPC connections and are not exposed to the internet. This results in layered firewalls with cloud-provider SDN firewalls and individual node-specific iptables rules.
```

BYOA environments
-----------------

> BYOA stands for Bring-Your-Own-Account. In this deployment model, customers deploy Aiven services under their own cloud accounts. Customers gain greater control over deployment configuration, but the VM-level firewall configurations are set at deployment time according to Aiven base configurations. In BYOA configurations, customers can apply additional firewalls using their cloud service provider's configuration options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the BYOA deployment model, you deploy Aiven services under your own cloud accounts. This gives you greater control over deployment configuration, but the VM-level firewall configurations are set at deployment time according to Aiven base configurations. You can apply additional firewalls using your cloud service provider's configuration options.
```
